================================================================================
2. File descriptors
================================================================================

The kvm API is centered around file descriptors.  An initial
open("/dev/kvm") obtains a handle to the kvm subsystem; this handle
can be used to issue system ioctls.  A KVM_CREATE_VM ioctl on this
handle will create a VM file descriptor which can be used to issue VM
ioctls.  A KVM_CREATE_VCPU or KVM_CREATE_DEVICE ioctl on a VM fd will
create a virtual cpu or device and return a file descriptor pointing to
the new resource.  Finally, ioctls on a vcpu or device fd can be used
to control the vcpu or device.  For vcpus, this includes the important
task of actually running guest code.

In general file descriptors can be migrated among processes by means
of fork() and the SCM_RIGHTS facility of unix domain socket.  These
kinds of tricks are explicitly not supported by kvm.  While they will
not cause harm to the host, their actual behavior is not guaranteed by
the API.  See "General description" for details on the ioctl usage
model that is supported by KVM.

It is important to note that althought VM ioctls may only be issued from
the process that created the VM, a VM's lifecycle is associated with its
file descriptor, not its creator (process).  In other words, the VM and
its resources, *including the associated address space*, are not freed
until the last reference to the VM's file descriptor has been released.
For example, if fork() is issued after ioctl(KVM_CREATE_VM), the VM will
not be freed until both the parent (original) process and its child have
put their references to the VM's file descriptor.

Because a VM's resources are not freed until the last reference to its
file descriptor is released, creating additional references to a VM via
via fork(), dup(), etc... without careful consideration is strongly
discouraged and may have unwanted side effects, e.g. memory allocated
by and on behalf of the VM's process may not be freed/unaccounted when
the VM is shut down.
